MONDAY, TUESDAY, WEDNESDAY, THURSDAY JULY 20-23, 1857


I started on my third excursion to the Maine woods Monday, July 20,
1857, with one companion, arriving at Bangor the next day at noon. The
succeeding morning, a relative of mine who is well acquainted with the
Penobscot Indians took me in his wagon to Oldtown to assist me in
obtaining an Indian for this expedition. We were ferried across to the
Indian Island in a bateau. The ferryman’s boy had the key to it, but the
father, who was a blacksmith, after a little hesitation, cut the chain
with a cold chisel on the rock. He told me that the Indians were nearly
all gone to the seaboard and to Massachusetts, partly on account of the
smallpox, of which they are very much afraid, having broken out in
Oldtown. The old chief Neptune, however, was there still.

The first man we saw on the island was an Indian named Joseph Polis,
whom my relative addressed familiarly as “Joe.” He was dressing a
deerskin in his yard. The skin was spread over a slanting log, and he
was scraping it with a stick held by both hands. He was stoutly built,
perhaps a little above the middle height, with a broad face, and, as
others said, perfect Indian features and complexion. His house was a
two-story white one with blinds, the best-looking that I noticed there,
and as good as an average one on a New England village street. It was
surrounded by a garden and fruit trees, single cornstalks standing
thinly amid the beans. We asked him if he knew any good Indian who would
like to go into the woods with us, that is, to the Allegash Lakes by way
of Moosehead, and return by the East Branch of the Penobscot.

To which he answered out of that strange remoteness in which the Indian
ever dwells to the white man, “Me like to go myself; me want to get some
moose”; and kept on scraping the skin.

The ferryman had told us that all the best Indians were gone except
Polis, who was one of the aristocracy. He, to be sure, would be the best
man we could have, but if he went at all would want a great price. Polis
asked at first two dollars a day but agreed to go for a dollar and a
half, and fifty cents a week for his canoe. He would come to Bangor with
his canoe by the seven o’clock train that evening--we might depend on
him. We thought ourselves lucky to secure the services of this man, who
was known to be particularly steady and trustworthy.

I spent the afternoon with my companion, who had remained in Bangor, in
preparing for our expedition, purchasing provisions, hard-bread,[1]
pork, coffee, sugar, etc., and some india-rubber clothing.

At evening the Indian arrived in the cars, and I led the way, while he
followed me, three quarters of a mile to my friend’s house, with the
canoe on his head. I did not know the exact route, but steered by the
lay of the land, as I do in Boston. I tried to enter into conversation
with him, but as he was puffing under the weight of his canoe, not
having the usual apparatus for carrying it, but, above all, as he was an
Indian, I might as well have been thumping on the bottom of his birch
the while. In answer to the various observations that I made he only
grunted vaguely from beneath his canoe once or twice, so that I knew he
was there.

Early the next morning the stage called for us. My companion and I had
each a large knapsack as full as it would hold, and we had two large
rubber bags which held our provisions and utensils. As for the Indian,
all the baggage he had, beside his axe and gun, was a blanket, which he
brought loose in his hand. However, he had laid in a store of tobacco
and a new pipe for the excursion. The canoe was securely lashed
diagonally across the top of the stage, with bits of carpet tucked under
the edge to prevent its chafing. The driver appeared as much accustomed
to carrying canoes in this way as bandboxes.

At the Bangor House we took in four men bound on a hunting excursion,
one of the men going as cook. They had a dog, a middling-sized brindled
cur, which ran by the side of the stage, his master showing his head and
whistling from time to time. But after we had gone about three miles the
dog was suddenly missing, and two of the party went back for him, while
the stage, which was full of passengers, waited. At length one man came
back, while the other kept on. This whole party of hunters declared
their intention to stop till the dog was found, but the very obliging
driver was ready to wait a spell longer. He was evidently unwilling to
lose so many passengers, who would have taken a private conveyance, or
perhaps the other line of stages, the next day. Such progress did we
make, with a journey of over sixty miles to be accomplished that day,
and a rainstorm just setting in. We discussed the subject of dogs and
their instincts till it was threadbare, while we waited there, and the
scenery of the suburbs of Bangor is still distinctly impressed on my
memory.

[Illustration: _The Stage on the Road to Moosehead Lake_]

After full half an hour the man returned, leading the dog by a rope. He
had overtaken him just as he was entering the Bangor House. He was then
tied on the top of the stage, but, being wet and cold, several times in
the course of the journey he jumped off, and I saw him dangling by his
neck. This dog was depended on to stop bears. He had already stopped one
somewhere in New Hampshire, and I can testify that he stopped a stage in
Maine. This party of four probably paid nothing for the dog’s ride,
nor for his run, while our party of three paid two dollars--and were
charged four--for the light canoe which lay still on the top.

The stage was crowded all the way. If you had looked inside you would
have thought that we were prepared to run the gantlet of a band of
robbers, for there were four or five guns on the front seat and one or
two on the back one, each man holding his darling in his arms. It
appeared that this party of hunters was going our way, but much farther.
Their leader was a handsome man about thirty years old, of good height,
but not apparently robust, of gentlemanly address and faultless toilet.
He had a fair white complexion as if he had always lived in the shade,
and an intellectual face, and with his quiet manners might have passed
for a divinity student who had seen something of the world. I was
surprised to find that he was probably the chief white hunter of Maine
and was known all along the road. I afterwards heard him spoken of as
one who could endure a great deal of exposure and fatigue without
showing the effect of it; and he could not only use guns, but make them,
being himself a gunsmith. In the spring he had saved a stage-driver and
two passengers from drowning in the backwater of the Piscataquis on this
road, having swum ashore in the freezing water and made a raft and got
them off--though the horses were drowned--at great risk to himself,
while the only other man who could swim withdrew to the nearest house to
prevent freezing. He knew our man, and remarked that we had a good
Indian there, a good hunter; adding that he was said to be worth six
thousand dollars. The Indian also knew him, and said to me, “The great
hunter.”

The Indian sat on the front seat with a stolid expression of face as if
barely awake to what was going on. Again I was struck by the peculiar
vagueness of his replies when addressed in the stage or at the taverns.
He really never said anything on such occasions. He was merely stirred
up like a wild beast, and passively muttered some insignificant
response. His answer, in such cases, was vague as a puff of smoke,
suggesting no _responsibility_, and if you considered it you would find
that you had got nothing out of him. This was instead of the
conventional palaver and smartness of the white man, and equally
profitable. Most get no more than this out of the Indian, and pronounce
him stolid accordingly. I was surprised to see what a foolish and
impertinent style a Maine man, a passenger, used in addressing him, as
if he were a child, which only made his eyes glisten a little. A tipsy
Canadian asked him at a tavern, in a drawling tone, if he smoked, to
which he answered with an indefinite “Yes.”

“Won’t you lend me your pipe a little while?” asked the other.

He replied, looking straight by the man’s head, with a face singularly
vacant to all neighboring interests, “Me got no pipe”; yet I had seen
him put a new one, with a supply of tobacco, into his pocket that
morning.

Our little canoe, so neat and strong, drew a favorable criticism from
all the wiseacres among the tavern loungers along the road. By the
roadside, close to the wheels, I noticed a splendid great purple fringed
orchis which I would fain have stopped the stage to pluck, but as this
had never been known to stop a bear, like the cur on the stage, the
driver would probably have thought it a waste of time.

When we reached the lake, about half past eight in the evening, it was
still steadily raining, and in that fresh, cool atmosphere the hylas
were peeping and the toads ringing about the lake. It was as if the
season had revolved backward two or three months, or I had arrived at
the abode of perpetual spring.

We had expected to go upon the lake at once, and, after paddling up two
or three miles, to camp on one of its islands, but on account of the
rain we decided to go to one of the taverns for the night.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Hard-bread or ship-bread is a kind of hard biscuit commonly baked in
large cakes and much used by sailors and soldiers.




II

FRIDAY, JULY 24.


About four o’clock the next morning, though it was quite cloudy,
accompanied by the landlord to the water’s edge, in the twilight, we
launched our canoe from a rock on Moosehead Lake. We had a rather small
canoe for three persons, eighteen and one fourth feet long by two feet
six and one half inches wide in the middle, and one foot deep within. I
judged that it would weigh not far from eighty pounds. The Indian had
recently made it himself, and its smallness was partly compensated for
by its newness, as well as stanchness and solidity, it being made of
very thick bark and ribs. Our baggage weighed about one hundred and
sixty-six pounds. The principal part of the baggage was, as usual,
placed in the middle of the broadest part, while we stowed ourselves in
the chinks and crannies that were left before and behind it, where there
was no room to extend our legs, the loose articles being tucked into the
ends. The canoe was thus as closely packed as a market basket. The
Indian sat on a crossbar in the stern, but we flat on the bottom with a
splint or chip behind our backs to protect them from the crossbar, and
one of us commonly paddled with the Indian.

Paddling along the eastern side of the lake in the still of the morning,
we soon saw a few sheldrakes, which the Indian called _Shecorways_, and
some peetweets on the rocky shore. We also saw and heard loons. It was
inspiriting to hear the regular dip of the paddles, as if they were our
fins or flippers, and to realize that we were at length fairly embarked.

Having passed the small rocky isles within two or three miles of the
foot of the lake, we had a short consultation respecting our course, and
inclined to the western shore for the sake of its lee; for otherwise,
if the wind should rise, it would be impossible for us to reach Mount
Kineo, which is about midway up the lake on the east side, but at its
narrowest part, where probably we could recross if we took the western
side. The wind is the chief obstacle to crossing the lakes, especially
in so small a canoe. The Indian remarked several times that he did not
like to cross the lakes “in littlum canoe,” but nevertheless, “just as
we say, it made no odds to him.”

Moosehead Lake is twelve miles wide at the widest place, and thirty
miles long in a direct line, but longer as it lies. Paddling near the
shore, we frequently heard the _pe-pe_ of the olive-sided flycatcher,
also the wood pewee and the kingfisher. The Indian reminding us that he
could not work without eating, we stopped to breakfast on the main shore
southwest of Deer Island. We took out our bags, and the Indian made a
fire under a very large bleached log, using white pine bark from a
stump, though he said that hemlock was better, and kindling with canoe
birch bark. Our table was a large piece of freshly peeled birch bark,
laid wrong side up, and our breakfast consisted of hard-bread, fried
pork, and strong coffee well sweetened, in which we did not miss the
milk.

While we were getting breakfast a brood of twelve black dippers,[2] half
grown, came paddling by within three or four rods, not at all alarmed;
and they loitered about as long as we stayed, now huddled close
together, now moving off in a long line, very cunningly.

Looking northward from this place it appeared as if we were entering a
large bay, and we did not know whether we should be obliged to diverge
from our course and keep outside a point which we saw, or should find a
passage between this and the mainland. It was misty dog-day weather, and
we had already penetrated a smaller bay of the same kind, and knocked
the bottom out of it, though we had been obliged to pass over a bar
between an island and the shore, where there was but just breadth and
depth enough to float the canoe, and the Indian had observed, “Very easy
makum bridge here,” but now it seemed that if we held on we should be
fairly embayed. Presently, however, the mist lifted somewhat and
revealed a break in the shore northward. The Indian immediately
remarked, “I guess you and I go there.”

This was his common expression instead of saying “we.” He never
addressed us by our names, though curious to know how they were spelled
and what they meant. We called him Polis. He had already guessed very
accurately at our ages, and said that he was forty-eight.

After breakfast I emptied the melted pork that was left into the lake,
making what the sailors call a “slick,” and watching to see how much it
spread over and smoothed the agitated surface. The Indian looked at it
a moment and said, “That make hard paddlum through; hold ’em canoe. So
say old times.”

We hastily reloaded, putting the dishes loose in the bows, that they
might be at hand when wanted, and set out again. The western shore, near
which we paddled along, rose gently to a considerable height and was
everywhere densely covered with the forest, in which was a large
proportion of hard wood to enliven and relieve the fir and spruce.

The Indian said that the lichen which we saw hanging from the trees was
called _chorchorque_. We asked him the names of several birds which we
heard this morning. The thrush, which was quite common, and whose note
he imitated, he said was called _Adelungquamooktum_; but sometimes he
could not tell the name of some small bird which I heard and knew, but
he said, “I tell all the birds about here; can’t tell littlum noise, but
I see ’em, then I can tell.”

I observed that I should like to go to school to him to learn his
language, living on the Indian island the while; could not that be done?

“Oh, yer,” he replied, “good many do so.”

I asked how long he thought it would take. He said one week. I told him
that in this voyage I would tell him all I knew, and he should tell me
all he knew, to which he readily agreed.

Mount Kineo, which was generally visible, though occasionally concealed
by islands or the mainland in front, had a level bar of cloud concealing
its summit, and all the mountain-tops about the lake were cut off at the
same height. Ducks of various kinds were quite common, and ran over the
water before us as fast as a horse trots.

The Indian asked the meaning of _reality_, as near as I could make out
the word, which he said one of us had used; also of _interrent_, that
is, intelligent. I observed that he could rarely sound the letter r,
but used l, as also r for l sometimes; as _load_ for road, _pickelel_
for pickerel, _Soogle_ Island for Sugar Island. He generally added the
syllable _um_ to his words, as _paddlum_, etc.

On a point on the mainland where we landed to stretch our legs and look
at the vegetation, going inland a few steps, I discovered a fire still
glowing beneath its ashes, where somebody had breakfasted, and a bed of
twigs prepared for the following night. So I knew not only that they had
just left, but that they designed to return, and by the breadth of the
bed that there was more than one in the party. You might have gone
within six feet of these signs without seeing them. There grew the
beaked hazel, rue seven feet high, and red osier, whose bark the Indian
said was good to smoke, “tobacco before white people came to this
country, Indian tobacco.”

The Indian was always very careful in approaching the shore, lest he
should injure his canoe on the rocks, letting it swing round slowly
sidewise, and was still more particular that we should not step into it
on shore, nor till it floated free, and then should step gently lest we
should open its seams, or make a hole in the bottom.

After passing Deer Island we saw the little steamer from Greenville, far
east in the middle of the lake. Sometimes we could hardly tell her from
an island which had a few trees on it. Here we were exposed to the wind
from over the whole breadth of the lake, and ran a little risk of being
swamped. While I had my eye fixed on the spot where a large fish had
leaped, we took in a gallon or two of water; but we soon reached the
shore and took the canoe over the bar at Sand-bar Island, a few feet
wide only, and so saved a considerable distance.

We crossed a broad bay and found the water quite rough. A very little
wind on these broad lakes raises a sea which will swamp a canoe. Looking
off from the shore, the surface may appear to be almost smooth a mile
distant, or if you see a few white crests they appear nearly level with
the rest of the lake, but when you get out so far, you may find quite a
sea running, and ere long, before you think of it, a wave will gently
creep up the side of the canoe and fill your lap, like a monster
deliberately covering you with its slime before it swallows you, or it
will strike the canoe violently and break into it. The same thing may
happen when the wind rises suddenly, though it were perfectly calm and
smooth there a few minutes before; so that nothing can save you, unless
you can swim ashore, for it is impossible to get into a canoe when it is
upset. Since you sit flat on the bottom, though the danger should not be
imminent, a little water is a great inconvenience, not to mention the
wetting of your provisions. We rarely crossed even a bay directly, from
point to point, when there was wind, but made a slight curve
corresponding somewhat to the shore, that we might the sooner reach it
if the wind increased.

When the wind is aft, and not too strong, the Indian makes a spritsail
of his blanket. He thus easily skims over the whole length of this lake
in a day.

The Indian paddled on one side, and one of us on the other, to keep the
canoe steady, and when he wanted to change hands he would say, “T’ other
side.” He asserted, in answer to our questions, that he had never upset
a canoe himself, though he may have been upset by others.

Think of our little eggshell of a canoe tossing across that great lake,
a mere black speck to the eagle soaring above it!

My companion trailed for trout as we paddled along, but, the Indian
warning him that a big fish might upset us, for there are some very
large ones there, he agreed to pass the line quickly to the stern if he
had a bite.

While we were crossing this bay, where Mount Kineo rose dark before us
within two or three miles, the Indian repeated the tradition respecting
this mountain’s having anciently been a cow moose--how a mighty Indian
hunter succeeded in killing this queen of the moose tribe with great
difficulty, while her calf was killed somewhere among the islands in
Penobscot Bay, and, to his eyes, this mountain had still the form of the
moose in a reclining posture. He told this at some length and with
apparent good faith, and asked us how we supposed the hunter could have
killed such a mighty moose as that. An Indian tells such a story as if
he thought it deserved to have a good deal said about it, only he has
not got it to say, and so he makes up for the deficiency by a drawling
tone, long-windedness, and a dumb wonder which he hopes will be
contagious.

We approached the land again through pretty rough water, and then
steered directly across the lake at its narrowest part to the eastern
side, and were soon partly under the lee of the mountain, having
paddled about twenty miles. It was now about noon.

We designed to stop there that afternoon and night, and spent half an
hour looking along the shore northward for a suitable place to camp. At
length, by going half a dozen rods into the dense spruce and fir wood on
the side of the mountain almost as dark as a cellar, we found a place
sufficiently clear and level to lie down on, after cutting away a few
bushes. The Indian cleared a path to it from the shore with his axe, and
we then carried up all our baggage, pitched our tent, and made our bed,
in order to be ready for foul weather, which then threatened us, and for
the night. He gathered a large armful of fir twigs, breaking them off,
which he said were the best for our bed, partly, I thought, because they
were the largest and could be most rapidly collected. It had been
raining more or less for four or five days, and the wood was even damper
than usual, but he got dry bark from the under side of a dead leaning
hemlock, which he said he could always do.

This noon his mind was occupied with a law question, and I referred him
to my companion, who was a lawyer. It appeared that he had been buying
land lately--I think it was a hundred acres--but there was probably an
incumbrance to it, somebody else claiming to have bought some grass on
it for this year. He wished to know to whom the grass belonged, and was
told that if the other man could prove that he bought the grass before
he, Polis, bought the land, the former could take it whether the latter
knew it or not. To which he only answered, “Strange!” He went over this
several times, fairly sat down to it, with his back to a tree, as if he
meant to confine us to this topic henceforth; but as he made no headway,
only reached the jumping-off place of his wonder at white men’s
institutions after each explanation, we let the subject die.

He said that he had fifty acres of grass, potatoes, etc., somewhere
above Oldtown, besides some about his house; that he hired a good deal
of his work, hoeing, etc., and preferred white men to Indians because
“they keep steady and know how.”

After dinner we returned southward along the shore, in the canoe, on
account of the difficulty of climbing over the rocks and fallen trees,
and began to ascend the mountain along the edge of the precipice. But, a
smart shower coming up just then, the Indian crept under his canoe,
while we, protected by our rubber coats, proceeded to botanize. So we
sent him back to the camp for shelter, agreeing that he should come for
us with his canoe toward night. It had rained a little in the forenoon,
and we trusted that this would be the clearing-up shower, which it
proved; but our feet and legs were thoroughly wet by the bushes. The
clouds breaking away a little, we had a glorious wild view, as we
ascended, of the broad lake with its numerous forest-clad islands
extending beyond our sight both north and south, and the boundless
forest undulating away from its shores on every side, as densely packed
as a rye-field and enveloping nameless mountains in succession. It was a
perfect lake of the woods.

Looking southward, the heavens were completely overcast, the mountains
capped with clouds, and the lake generally wore a dark and stormy
appearance, but from its surface six or eight miles distant there was
reflected upward through the misty air a bright blue tinge from the
unseen sky of another latitude beyond. They probably had a clear sky
then at the south end of the lake.

Again we mistook a little rocky islet seen through the “drisk,” with
some taller bare trunks or stumps on it, for the steamer with its
smoke-pipes, but as it had not changed its position after half an hour
we were undeceived. So much do the works of man resemble the works of
nature. A moose might mistake a steamer for a floating isle, and not be
scared till he heard its puffing or its whistle.

If I wished to see a mountain or other scenery under the most favorable
auspices, I would go to it in foul weather so as to be there when it
cleared up. We are then in the most suitable mood, and nature is most
fresh and inspiring. There is no serenity so fair as that which is just
established in a tearful eye.

Jackson, in his “Report on the Geology of Maine,” says: “Hornstone,
which will answer for flints, occurs in various parts of the State. The
largest mass of this stone known in the world is Mount Kineo, upon
Moosehead Lake, which appears to be entirely composed of it, and rises
seven hundred feet above the lake level. This variety of hornstone I
have seen in every part of New England in the form of Indian
arrow-heads, hatchets, chisels, etc., which were probably obtained from
this mountain by the aboriginal inhabitants of the country.”

I have myself found hundreds of arrow-heads made of the same material.
It is generally slate-colored, with white specks, becoming a uniform
white where exposed to the light and air. I picked up a small thin piece
which had so sharp an edge that I used it as a knife, and, to see what I
could do, fairly cut off an aspen one inch thick with it, by bending it
and making many cuts; though I cut my fingers badly with the back of it
in the meanwhile.

From the summit of the precipice which forms the southern and eastern
sides of this mountain peninsula, five or six hundred feet high, we
probably might have jumped down to the water, or to the seemingly
dwarfish trees on the narrow neck of land which connects it with the
main. It is a dangerous place to try the steadiness of your nerves.

The plants which attracted our attention on this mountain were the
mountain cinquefoil, abundant and in bloom still at the very base by
the waterside, very beautiful harebells overhanging the precipice,
bearberry, the Canada blueberry, wild holly, the great round-leafed
orchis, bunchberry, reddening as we ascended, green at the base of the
mountain, red at the top, and the small fern _Woodsia ilvensis_, growing
in tufts, now in fruit. Having explored the wonders of the mountain, and
the weather being now cleared up, we commenced the descent. We met the
Indian, puffing and panting, about one third of the way up, but thinking
that he must be near the top. On reaching the canoe we found that he had
caught a lake trout weighing about three pounds, while we were on the
mountain.

When we got to the camp, the canoe was taken out and turned over, and a
log laid across it to prevent its being blown away. The Indian cut some
large logs of damp and rotten wood to smoulder and keep fire through the
night. The trout was fried for supper.

Our tent was of thin cotton cloth and quite small, forming with the
ground a triangular prism closed at the rear end, six feet long, seven
wide, and four high, so that we could barely sit up in the middle. It
required two forked stakes, a smooth ridgepole, and a dozen or more pins
to pitch it. It kept off dew and wind and an ordinary rain, and answered
our purpose well enough. We reclined within it till bedtime, each with
his baggage at his head, or else sat about the fire, having hung our wet
clothes on a pole before the fire for the night.

As we sat there, just before night, looking out through the dusky wood,
the Indian heard a noise which he said was made by a snake. He imitated
it at my request, making a low whistling note--_pheet_--_pheet_--two or
three times repeated, somewhat like the peep of the hyla, but not so
loud. He said that he had never seen them while making it, but going to
the spot he finds the snake. This, he said, was a sign of rain. When I
had selected this place for our camp he had remarked that there were
snakes there. “But they won’t do any hurt,” I said.

“Oh, no,” he answered, “just as you say; it makes no difference to me.”

He lay on the right side of the tent, because, as he said, he was partly
deaf in one ear, and he wanted to lie with his good ear up. As we lay
there he inquired if I ever heard “Indian sing.” I replied that I had
not often, and asked him if he would not favor us with a song. He
readily assented, and, lying on his back, with his blanket wrapped
around him, he commenced a slow, somewhat nasal, yet musical chant, in
his own language, which probably was taught his tribe long ago by the
Catholic missionaries. He translated it to us, sentence by sentence,
afterward. It proved to be a very simple religious exercise or hymn, the
burden of which was that there was only one God who ruled all the
world.

His singing carried me back to the period of the discovery of America,
when Europeans first encountered the simple faith of the Indian. There
was, indeed, a beautiful simplicity about it; nothing of the dark and
savage, only the mild and infantile. The sentiments of humility and
reverence chiefly were expressed.

It was a dense and damp spruce and fir wood in which we lay, and, except
for our fire, perfectly dark; and when I awoke in the night, I either
heard an owl from deeper in the forest behind us, or a loon from a
distance over the lake. Getting up some time after midnight to collect
the scattered brands together, while my companions were sound asleep, I
observed, partly in the fire, which had ceased to blaze, a perfectly
regular elliptical ring of light, about five inches in its shortest
diameter, six or seven in its longer, and from one eighth to one quarter
of an inch wide. It was fully as bright as the fire, but not reddish or
scarlet like a coal, but a white and slumbering light, like the
glowworm’s. I saw at once that it must be phosphorescent wood, which I
had often heard of, but never chanced to see. Putting my finger on it,
with a little hesitation, I found that it was a piece of dead moosewood
which the Indian had cut off in a slanting direction the evening before.

Using my knife, I discovered that the light proceeded from that portion
of the sapwood immediately under the bark, and thus presented a regular
ring at the end, and when I pared off the bark and cut into the sap, it
was all aglow along the log. I was surprised to find the wood quite hard
and apparently sound, though probably decay had commenced in the sap,
and I cut out some little triangular chips, and, placing them in the
hollow of my hand, carried them into the camp, waked my companion, and
showed them to him. They lit up the inside of my hand, revealing the
lines and wrinkles, and appearing exactly like coals of fire raised to a
white heat.

I noticed that part of a decayed stump within four or five feet of the
fire, an inch wide and six inches long, soft and shaking wood, shone
with equal brightness.

I neglected to ascertain whether our fire had anything to do with this,
but the previous day’s rain and long-continued wet weather undoubtedly
had.

I was exceedingly interested by this phenomenon. It could hardly have
thrilled me more if it had taken the form of letters, or of the human
face. I little thought that there was such a light shining in the
darkness of the wilderness for me.

The next day the Indian told me their name for the
light--_artoosoqu’_--and on my inquiring concerning the will-o’-the-wisp
he said that his “folks” sometimes saw fires passing along at various
heights, even as high as the trees, and making a noise. I was prepared
after this to hear of the most startling and unimagined phenomena
witnessed by “his folks,” they are abroad at all hours and seasons in
scenes so unfrequented by white men. Nature must have made a thousand
revelations to them which are still secrets to us.

I did not regret my not having seen this before, since I now saw it
under circumstances so favorable. I was in just the frame of mind to see
something wonderful, and this was a phenomenon adequate to my
circumstances and expectation, and it put me on the alert to see more
like it. I let science slide, and rejoiced in that light as if it had
been a fellow creature. A scientific _explanation_, as it is called,
would have been altogether out of place there. That is for pale
daylight. Science with its retorts would have put me to sleep; it was
the opportunity to be ignorant that I improved. It made a believer of me
more than before. I believed that the woods were not tenantless, but
choke-full of honest spirits as good as myself any day--not an empty
chamber in which chemistry was left to work alone, but an inhabited
house. It suggested, too, that the same experience always gives birth
to the same sort of belief or religion. One revelation has been made to
the Indian, another to the white man. I have much to learn of the
Indian, nothing of the missionary. I am not sure but all that would
tempt me to teach the Indian my religion would be his promise to teach
me _his_. Long enough I had heard of irrelevant things; now at length I
was glad to make acquaintance with the light that dwells in rotten wood.

I kept those little chips and wet them again the next night, but they
emitted no light.

FOOTNOTES:

[2] The name dipper is applied to several species of water-birds that
are notable for their skill in diving.


